In “High-Rise,” a stylish but cold adaptation of novelist J.G. Ballard’s 1975 dystopian parable of class warfare — carried out in microcosm, inside a single, skyscraper-like English apartment building — Tom Hiddleston’s Dr. Robert Laing isn’t so much a character as a machine part. From a narrative perspective, he’s a critical linchpin, connecting the privileged haves on the upper floors with the grumbling have-nots down below, where amenities are more scarce and becoming scarcer.

It’s just that he isn’t much of a believable human being.

[2016 Summer Movie Guide: Superheroes and sequels]

Laing, who has just moved into the building, circulates freely between both camps, getting invited to the penthouse, where the building’s haughty architect (Jeremy Irons), unsubtly named Royal, enjoys a landscaped rooftop garden, complete with a wandering horse. But Laing also is friends with the aptly named Wilder (Luke Evans), a slightly chummier but understandably malcontent documentary filmmaker who helps rile up his fellow tenants in the building’s lower half when they are barred from using the community swimming pool, and when the trash chutes clog.

It’s pretty clear that this will not end well, and not just because Ballard’s surprisingly contemporary allusions to income inequality and class rage are drawn with such a heavy hand by the book’s adapters, director Ben Wheatley and writer Amy Jump (Wheatley’s co-writer on his breakout feature “Kill List”). “High-Rise” opens with images of the gruesome violence that results from this clash of two tribes, and then flashes back to the buildup that led to it. So much for suspense.

Yet the overly schematic nature of “High-Rise” does not entirely diminish its pleasures as a story, which include, in addition to Wheatley’s richly lurid visual sensibility, an effective metaphorical tool in Laing. One early scene features him sunbathing, nude, on his balcony as an upstairs neighbor (Sienna Miller) looks hungrily down on him from above. The sense of vulnerability — and humanity as meat — is palpable. 
