There is a moment late in "The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies," after what may be the longest on-screen battle in movie history, when Ian McKellen's Gandalf sits quietly beside Martin Freeman's Bilbo Baggins and starts fussing with his pipe. No one fusses with a pipe more fussily than a great veteran English character actor, and as McKellen carefully scrapes out the bowl, getting it ready for a nice little smoke, you wonder if director Peter Jackson is going to turn this bit into his next three-film trilogy.

The pipe business constitutes the 10 or 15 most enjoyable seconds of this protracted wrap-up to Jackson's "Hobbit" trilogy. What's next for Jackson and company? A 10-hour version of "The Very Hungry Caterpillar"?

The studio flackery advertises "The Battle of the Five Armies" as "the defining chapter" of the series, which is true if you define the word "defining" as a synonym for "least interesting." The movie begins well, simply to mess with us. At the end of the second and best "Hobbit" movie, the village of Lake-town was dreading the arrival of Smaug the dragon. In "The Battle of the Five Armies" Smaug hits town with a vengeance, and one charred seaside locale later, "The Battle of the Five Armies" begins the laborious business of setting up the various factions of Erebor Dwarves, elvinfolk, nasty, brutish Orcs and other warriors. At stake is the control of the capital-M Mountain and its attendant riches.

When the second "Hobbit" film turned out to be considerably less of a drag than the first, I thought, well, who knows, maybe Jackson and his fellow adapters can justify the third and final installment. But every vignette in a lengthy string of combat scenes is staged, photographed and digitally finessed like the previous one. Clearly, Jackson has no reason to change his game plan now, since all the robotic boom shots and rotoscope-y pivots and overhead semicircles have worked with audiences since the first of the "Lord of the Rings" trilogy, back in days of yore. But by the second hour of "The Battle of the Five Armies," the visual approach becomes a paradox: monotonously dynamic epic storytelling. One too many lines of dialogue ("We have a long march ahead") are like thought balloons for those in the audience who aren't sufficiently in love with J.R.R. Tolkien's world to justify three movies pulled, taffylike, out of a single modest book, with interpolations from yon and hither and back again.

Bilbo's barely in this one, but Evangeline Lilly and Orlando Bloom are attractive in close-up, and true to the "Rings" trilogy, "The Battle of the Five Armies" is treated to at least five separate endings so we know that Jackson isn't kidding: The trilogy's really ending; the long march is over. I did find the logistics of waging battle on a frozen river fairly entertaining. But, honestly, if it weren't for McKellen's pipe-cleaning routine, which he might well take on tour, a well-made tough sit of a trilogy capper would've become a challenge of Tolkien proportions.
